# Characterizing data for analysis

## 2.2 Defining statistical variables

> The world **variable** is used in statistically oriented literature to indicate a characteristic or property that is possible to measure.

Variables can be measured as directly or indirectly and can be represented as direct physical measurements or abstractly.

The symbol `P` is used to denote the number of variables and the symbol `N` to denote the number of **individuals**, **observations**, **cases**, or **sample units**

## 2.3 Steven's classification of variables

Stevens (1951) proposes that measurements are classified as **nominal**, **ordinal**, **interval**, or **ratio**.

**Nominal**

> With **nominal variables** each observation belongs to one of several distinct categories. The categories are not necessarily numerical, although numbers may be used to represent them. For example, `sex` is a nominal variable. An individual's gender is either male or female. We may use any two symbols, such as `M` and `F`, to represent the two categories.

Any set of numbers can be used to represent nominal variables. For example, male and female could also be represented as `0` and `1`.

**Ordinal**

> Categories are used for **ordinal variables** as well, but there also exists a known order among them.

Any numbers can be used to represent the categories as long as they are ordered in magnitude. The basic empirical operation defining ordinal variables is whether one observation is more significant than another.

**Interval**

> An **interval variable** is a variable in which the differences between successive values are always the same.

**Ratio**

> **Ratio variables** are interval variables with a natural point representing the origin of measurement, i.e., a natural zero point. For instance, height is a ratio variable since zero height is a naturally defined point on the scale.

The difference between two interval variables is a ratio variable. For example, although time of day is measured on the interval scale, the length of time of a period is a ratio variable since it has a natural zero point.

**Other classifications**

The term **categorical variables** is often used to refer to nominal and ordinal variables where categories are used.

Variables may also be classified as **discrete** or **continuous**.

> A variable is called **continuous** if it can take on any value in a specified range.

Any variable that is not continuous is called discrete.

> A **discrete** variable may take on only certain specified values.

All nominal and ordinal variables are discrete. For example, counts are discrete since only zero or positive integers are possible.

## 2.4 How variables are used in data analysis

Variables may be used to measure outcomes or to explain a particular result. For example, an **outcome variable** could be a discrete variable classified as `cured` or not `cured`. Although, in other situations the outcome variable could be treated as a continuous variable.

This outcome could depend on several characteristics sometimes referred to as **explanatory** or **predictor** variables. Equivalently, the outcome can be called the **dependent variable** and the characteristics the **independent variable**. Note, using the term 'independent' does not have to refer to a statistically independent variable.

Variables are not always classified as dependent or independent but instead a small number of summary variables. Those summary variables may be used later as outcomes/predictors.

## 2.6 Other characteristics of data

Some variables are likely to have observations that include errors. The errors can be described as **outliers** and are sometimes considered for removal. Datasets with a significant portion of inaccuracies are called 'dirty' data sets. Some statistical methods are more sensitive to 'dirty' data than others.
