# Selecting appropriate analyses

## 5.1 Which analyses to perform?

Questions that arise:

- What descriptive measures should be used to examine the data?
- What statistical analyses should be performed?

Steps to take:

- Cleaning and transformation
- Obtain statistics and graphs
- Calculate the number of missing values for each variable

## 5.3 Appropriate statistical measures

**Table 5.1 Descriptive measures depending upon Steven's scale**

|Classification|Graphical Measure|Measures of the center of a distribution|Measures of the variability of a distribution|
|:----|:----|:----|:----|
|Nominal|Bar graphs<br>Pie charts<br>|Mode|Binomial or multinomial variance|
|Ordinal|Histogram|Median|Range<br>P<sub>75</sub> - P<sub>25</sub>|
|Interval|Histogram areas measurable|Mean = *X*|Standard deviation = *S*|
Ratio|Histogram areas measurable|Geometric mean<br>Harmonic mean|Coefficient of variation = *S/X*

The *mode* or outcome of a variable that occurs most frequently is the appropriate measure of the center of distribution. For a binary variable such *sex* where only two outcomes are possible, the variance of the proportion of cases who are one or the other can be measured using **binomial variance** where *p* is the proportion of respondents who are males (females). When more than two outcomes are possible, the variance of the *i*th proportion is given by:

Estimated variance of p<sub>i</sub> = p<sub>*i*</sub> (1 - p<sub>*i*</sub>) / *N*

**Measures for ordinal data**

For ordinal variables, an appropriate measure of the center of the distribution is the median.

> Roughly speaking, the **median** is the value of the of the variable that half the respondents exceed and half do not. The **range**, or largest minus smallest observation, is a measure of how variable or disperse the distribution is.

Another measure than can be reported is the difference between two percentiles. For example, some reporters prefer to report the **interquartile range** *Q(0.75)* - *Q(0.25)*, or the **quartile deviation**, (*Q(0.75)* - *Q(0.25)*)/2.

Box-plots can be used if they display the median and quartiles. Histograms can also be used. Although, the area under the histogram has no meaning because intervals between successive values are not necessarily equal).

**Measures for interval data**

For interval data the full range of descriptive statistics are generally used.

> This set includes graphical measures such as histograms, with the area under the histogram now having meaning. Boxplots can now be used that display either medians and quartiles or means and standard deviations.

Stem and leaf visualizations can also be applied.

The **mean** and **standard deviation** can now be used to describe data numerically.

**Measures for ratio data**

Additional measures can be used for ratio data but are seldom used.

The **geometric mean (GM)** is sometimes used when the log transformation is used. It is also used when computed the mean of a process where there is a constant rate of change.

Harmonic mean
